# Trucking Labor Analysis
## Methodology Overview

This research examines the impact of the deployment of self-driving technology in the long haul trucking industry on the labor market for truck drivers. The objective is to evaluate the effect of different deployment scenarios on truck driver employment and wages. A simple approach to the problem would take the projected number of self-driving trucks deployed and convert this to a number of drivers displaced according to some utilization ratio (for example, one self driving truck might displace two drivers). Our analysis moves beyond this simple accounting exercise by applying the transfer hub operational model and employing an equilibrium multi-sector supply and demand model that takes into account the effect of self-driving truck deployment on wages, the effect of lower transport costs on consumer demand, and the spillover effects of increased long haul shipping on the demand for short haul drivers. We also employ a model of driver retirement to benchmark our employment forecasts against.

## Demand for long and short haul drivers
We estimate the wage elasticity of demand in the long haul and short haul trucking sectors, as well as the relationship between the volume of long haul trucking and the demand for complementary short haul drivers. In the long haul sector, we estimate the following demand relationship:

<code>log(S<sub>sy</sub>) = α<sub>y</sub> + βlog(wages<sub>y</sub>) + γincome<sub>sy</sub> + E<sub>sy</sub></code>

Where <code>S<sub>sy</sub></code> is the share of the workforce in state `s` in year `y` employed in long haul trucking. This is obtained from BLS data. long haul trucking is given by occupation code `53-3032`. On the right-hand side of the equation is a year fixed effect, <code>α<sub>y</sub></code>, <code>wage<sub>sy</sub></code>, the annual wage for long haul drivers in state `s`, year `y`, <code>income<sub>sy</sub></code>, the median income in state `s`, year `y`, and an error term. The main coefficient of interest is `β`, the wage elasticity of demand. Data includes all years from 2001-2016 on all US states excluding Hawaii.

Since we want to obtain the wage elasticity of demand, `β`, we need to instrument for wages with a supply shifter that induces exogenous variation in the wage level across states and years. An ordinary least squares (OLS) regression that does not use an instrumental variable (IV) would be subject to endogeneity problems; wages may rise because supply has fallen, and the equilibrium has moved up the demand curve, or because demand has risen and equilibrium has moved up the demand curve. To isolate the slope of the demand curve, it is necessary to use an IV. We use the share of all employees in a state-year that are union members as our “supply shifter” instrument. This data comes from the CPS. Conditional on state-year median income and year effects, changes in the fraction of employees in a state that are unionized affect the demand for truck drivers from that state only through its effect on wages, where more unionized state-years will have higher wages than less unionized state-years.

In the short haul sector, we use the following demand specification:

<code>log(S<sub>sy</sub>) = α<sub>y</sub> + β log(wage<sub>sy</sub>) + γincome<sub>sy</sub> + δlonghaul<sub>sy</sub> + E<sub>sy</sub></code>

In this specification, <code>S<sub>sy</sub></code> is that state-year employment share in short haul trucking and <code>wage<sub>sy</sub></code> is the state-year short haul wage. Data comes from BLS occupation code `53-3031`. <code>longhaul<sub>sy</sub></code> is the mean number of long haul truck drivers employed in year `y` in all other states. Otherwise, the specification is identical to the long haul demand specification described above. The key parameters of interest here are `β`, the wage elasticity of demand in the short haul sector, and `δ` the feedback parameter which is a measure of how much demand for short haul trucking responds to increases in the volume of long haul trucking. As with the long haul demand equation, this regression is estimated using share unionized to instrument for wages.

## Driver supply
We estimate driver supply using a logit occupation choice model. We suppose that drivers can choose between working in long haul trucking, short haul trucking, other driving, and an “outside option”. The “outside option” can be interpreted as the option a driver has to leave driving employment. We do not say anything about what types of jobs former drivers take, or what share of them actually find jobs. For the purposes of this report, we interpret drivers who switch from driving employment to the outside option as “unemployed”. For each job type, `j`, driver `i` obtains a utility given by:

<code>u<sub>syji</sub> = α<sub>sy</sub> + δ<sub>j</sub> + βlog(wage<sub>syj</sub>) + ξ<sub>syj</sub> + E<sub>syji</sub></code>

Where <code>α<sub>sy</sub></code> is a state-year fixed effect, <code>δ<sub>j</sub></code> is a job type fixed effect, <code>wage<sub>syj</sub></code> is the wage in state `s`, year `y`, for job type `j`. Wages come from the BLS, and the “other driving” wage is the mean of all occupations with occupation cods beginning in `53-30`, excluding long and short haul trucking. <code>ξ<sub>syj</sub></code> is a state-year-occupation level unobservable, and <code>E<sub>syji</sub></code> is an individual `i` specific logit shock. Note that “outside option” utility is fixed at 0, and “other driving” has <code>δ<sub>j</sub> = 0</code> (these are standard normalizations). The logit shock assumption means that the model can be written as follows (after Berry, 1994):

<code>log(S<sub>syj</sub>) − log(S<sub>sy0</sub>) = α<sub>sy</sub> + δ<sub>j</sub> + βlog(wage<sub>syj</sub>) + ξ<sub>syj</sub></code>


Where <code>S<sub>syj</sub></code> is the share of drivers employed in job `j` in state `s`, year `y`, and <code>S<sub>sy0</sub></code> is the share of drivers “unemployed”. To obtain these shares, we use employments in each job/sector from the BLS, and divide the number of drivers in each job by the total number of “potential drivers” in a state. Potential drivers are obtained by finding the maximum number of people ever employed in driving occupations in a state over the years 2000-2016 (plus one so the share <code>S<sub>sy0</sub></code> is never equal to 0). The main coefficient of interest in this regression is the pseudo-elasticity, `β`. Note that we include state-by-year fixed effects and occupation fixed effects. If we did not instrument for wage, there would only be an endogeneity problem here if there is an unobserved factor at the year-by-occupation or state-by-occupation level. That is, something beyond wages is making long haul trucking more/less appealing over time relative to other occupations, or something makes the relative attractiveness of long and short haul driving different in Florida than it is in Texas.

Although the fixed effects included here make endogeneity less of a problem, we still instrument for wages to ensure a credible estimate of the wage elasticity of supply. In particular, we need an instrument that shifts wages by shifting the demand curve. We use two instruments: state-year median income and state-year employment in manufacturing. Higher median income in a state increases demand for shipments into that state, and higher manufacturing employment increases demand for shipments out of that state. These instruments should have no effect on the relative supply of workers into different driving jobs, other than through their effect on relative wages.

## Driver retirement
The estimated demand and supply models will allow us to solve for equilibrium employment and wages in different future deployment scenarios. Reduced demand for long haul drivers may lead to lower driver employment, but some of the loss in jobs is likely to be absorbed by driver retirements, and therefore should not be thought of as unemployment. In order to quantify this effect, we project retirements from long haul trucking each year from 2018 to 2028.

To do this, we obtain the distribution of driver ages in the long haul sector each year from 2000 to 2016 using CPS data. We then compute an average retirement rate for each age over 60 over different time periods in the data. For example, the retirement rate at 65 is the difference between the fraction of individuals in the 65 year old cohort and the fraction of individuals in the 66 year old cohort who are drivers divided by the fraction of individuals who are drivers in the 65 year old. We assume that all truck drivers who are still employed at age 70 retire the next year. We then take the distribution of truck driver ages from the last few years and project it forward, aging each driver by one year and then applying the retirement rates to all drivers over 60. We repeat this for every year up to 2028, and record the number of retirements for each year.

The projected retirements are therefore a function of average historical retirement rates and the current age distribution of drivers. If, for example, most drivers are over 50 years old, then the projected retirements over 20 years will be higher than they would be if most drivers were under 50 years old.

## Equilibrium projection
To generate projected results for different deployment scenarios, we put the estimated demand and supply together in an equilibrium framework. We were provided with three timelines for deployment of self-driving trucks. Each timeline specifies, for each year between 2018 and 2028, the number of self-driving tucks deployed. For each year of each scenario, we compute equilibria in the markets for long and short haul drivers.

Suppose that in year `y`, one’s projection is that `x` self-driving tucks will be deployed. We assume that this will decrease demand for long haul drivers by some multiple of `x`. We generate the main results for 2x, 3x, and 5x multipliers. These multipliers reflect the fact that self-driving trucks can be utilized more intensively that human driven trucks. One self-driving truck might be able to drive the same number of miles in one year as 2, 3, or 5 drivers.

Suppose the multiplier is 2x. We shift the demand curve to the left by 2x at every wage level. We then find the wage that sets long haul drivers demanded equal to long haul drivers supplied - the equilibrium wage. We then take the equilibrium number of long haul drivers, call this `E`, and feed `E + 2x`, the effective number of long haul drivers (human and self-driving truck) on the road into the demand for short haul drivers. We then find equilibrium wage in the short haul market. However, since the equilibrium wage in the short haul market changes the supply of drivers in the long haul market, we have to recompute equilibrium in the long haul market. We continue to iterate until we find wages and employment levels at which both markets are in a joint equilibrium. We then record employment and wages in each market for this projected year.

Note that the equilibrium projections are at the national market level, while the estimation takes place at the state level. This means that, while the estimated slope parameters (the responses of demand and supply to wages and the response of short haul demand to the level of long haul trucking) can be directly applied to the projection, the level parameters (fixed effects) cannot. We choose level parameters to calibrate the model by matching equilibrium wages under X = 0 (no deployment) to the level of equilibrium wages observed in reality (in 2016). Note that our calibration targets baseline wages, not employment. We “sanity check” our model by checking whether, when we find parameters that match actual wages, we also match actual equilibrium employment.

With some of the more out-of-sample projections, we run into a problem when demand for short haul drivers is projected to be very high. For example, the highest adoption scenario with a 5x multiplier. In this case, since the pool of potential drivers is fixed and demand for short haul drivers is very high, almost all drivers move into short haul and the wage becomes unreasonably large. This is not realistic since a very high wage will induce more non-drivers to transition into driving occupations. We did not explicitly estimate this margin of substitution since there is no extreme demand variation in the historical data that could be used to do so. Instead, our projections assume that once the short haul wage is high enough to attract almost all drivers to short haul employment, the feedback effect of long haul self driving truck deployment on short haul demand stops. This is a reasonable assumption to make since it is likely the marginal feedback effect will be much smaller than the estimated effect for large deployments of self driving trucks.

## Data description
The Current Population Survey (CPS) (https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/cps.html) is jointly sponsored by the United States Census Bureau and the Bureau of Labor Statistics and provides the government and researchers with labor force statistics on a monthly basis. The CPS collects information on the work, earnings, education, and demographics of the workforce. We use the data from monthly surveys from 2001-2016 to generate statistics on the unionization rate instrument as well as for the age patterns of individuals in the trucking industry. The CPS uses 4-digit industry codes. We make use of the codes that are standardized to match the 2010 basis as provided for in the Census occupation codes. The relevant 4-digit code for our analysis is 9600 (Industrial Truck and Tractor Operators).

The Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) program (https://www.bls.gov/oes/) creates statistics on the workforce and earnings for occupations at state and local levels. We use this data source for information on the annual wages for different driving professions as well as the employment shares in each of these occupations by state-year for 2001-2016. Data is summarized at the 6-digit industry code; in the previous sections we describe the industry codes of interest.

We further use data on median incomes by state-year from the United States Census Bureau. Table H08 (https://www2.census.gov/programs-surveys/cps/tables/time-series/historical-income-households/h08.xls) summarizes this information at the state-year level and we use this variable as a control as described in the methodology above.

## References

Berry, S. T. 1994. “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation.” The RAND Journal of Economics.









